---
layout: post
categories: lectures
title: Operators & algorithms
---

# Operators & algorithms

In our last lecture, we looked at operations, primarily on numbers and
strings. The `+` operator could work on both numbers and strings, however,
some of the other operators you've seen, such as `*`, `/`, and `-` are possible
only on numbers. If you try to divide a string by another string, or even
by a number, what does that mean. It doesn't really make sense to do so,
which is why you'll get an error. For example, `c = s / a` in the following
equations won't work.

    a = 5
    s = "this is a string"
    # c = s / a

Another operator for numbers that we haven't discussed yet, but it very
useful in programming is the modulus operator. The modulus will produce
the remainder of a division. To understand this, it's helpful to think
back to when you learned long-division in 5th grade. This was before
you were introduced to decimals, most likely. In 5th grade division,
if you divide 75/50, you get 1 R 25, also known as 1 remainder 25. This
is because 50 goes into 75 one time with 25 left over. Since 25 is less
than 50, there isn't another chunk of 50 in the 75. We can see this in
code in the following example


    a = 75
    b = 50
    c = int(a / b)
    print(c)
    c = a % b # the % is the mod operator
    print("mod ", c)

The mod operator is really useful for finding out how many discrete
elements are left over after a division.

### Exercise

Convert 200 seconds to minutes and seconds.

If you just do division only, you'll have a fractional number of minutes,
but you won't have minutes and seconds. To get seconds, you need to use
the mod operator.

### Algorithms

In the couple of programs that we've written so far, the one where we
calculated area and circumference and the seconds to minutes and seconds
conversion that we just did, there is what's called an algorithm that
was implemented. The concept of an algorithm is key in computer programming
because ultimately every program that you write will be implementing
some sort of algorithm. Some algorithms will be simple and some will be
very complex.

An algorithm is a defined set of steps, or a process, that is followed
to solve a problem. We implement algorithms in computer code. One
important concept to note here is that algorithms generalize to all
programming languages, they are not specific to Python. All languages
are used to implement algorithms, and we have selected Python as
our vehicle for implementing algorithms.

You can think of an algorithm as being similar to a recipe. There is an
objective to accomplish (problem to solve) and the order of the steps that you
take to solve that problem matters. For example, seconds converter (shown
in Lecture4Mins.py), we declare a variable called seconds and then use it
in our calculations. If we tried to use seconds before declaring it, the
program would fail, we missed a step in implementing our algorithm.

One of the features of a good algorithm is that it is general purpose. This
can mean many different things depending on the algorithm, but for our
purposes right here, it will mean that the algorithm works for many
different inputs. In our previous examples, we've calculated area and
circumference for a fixed radius and we've calculated minutes and seconds
from a fixed number of seconds. But, what is much more common and useful
in a program is to have the program calculate area and circumference for
any radius given by a user, for example. We want the user to be able to
input a value for one or more variables, and then our program will use
those inputs in the calculations.

There are a few ways to get user input in Python. There is a built-in
function called input that will prompt the user when the program runs.
There are also command-line arguments, which are values that you enter
when you run the program. We will discuss both approaches.

The Python input command will display a prompt on screen, and wait for
a response typed on the keyboard by the user. Whatever the user types
in then stored in a variable, that can then be used in the code.

For example:

    d = input("Please enter a number:")
    print(d)

The `input` command waits for the user to enter something when the program runs
in this example, the value they enter is stored in variable `d`, which is a string by default
doing any math operations on d requires converting it to a number, such as an int or float.

    # for example, this expression will break
    # e = d + 5

    # however, this is legal
    e = int(d) + 5
    print(d," plus 5 equals ", e)

    # for example, we could modify the code to work for
    # any number of seconds
    # Python has an input command to get user input
    seconds = input("Enter a number of seconds to convert: ")

    # convert seconds to an integer, it's treated as
    # a string by default
    seconds = int(seconds)

    # do the calculations
    mins = int(seconds / 60)

    # to get seconds, we want the modulus of dividing by 60
    # this is the fractional seconds in a minute
    s = seconds % 60
    print("200 seconds is ",mins, " mins and ", s, "seconds")

### Exercise

Burning one gallon of gasoline in your car produces 19.4 pounds of CO2.
First, Write a program to answer the following question:
If the Subaru WRX gets 26 mpg, how much CO2 does this vehicle
produce if it travels 12,000 miles a year? Print the result in a nice
print statement.

Next, modify the code to ask the user how many miles per year they travel and
the mpg that their car gets, use these inputs in your calculation instead
of the 12,000 miles and the 26mpg

The value of having miles and mpg be inputs to the calculation for
CO2PerYear is we can calculate this value for any yearly mileage and
any mpg rating.

<cite>Lecture material by Rhonda Hoenigman.</cite>

