---
layout: post
categories: lectures
title: Functions
---

# Functions

We've already worked with a lot of the built in functions in Python.
For example, the Python print function, when called like:
print("hello world") will print the hello world to the terminal.

Functions are code blocks that perform some task. For print, the task
is to print whatever appears between the (). The string in the () is
called an argument to the function, it's information that the function
needs in order to perform its task. If you used print(), Python
wouldn't know what you wanted to print, there's no value there.

Functions can also produce a value. For example, when you used the input
function, it had an argument that was the text to display, and it
produced a value, which was what the user entered. The value that a function
produces is called the return value. It's the value that comes out of the
function, and to get that value, you need to set a variable equal to
the function return.

Functions have a name to identify it, zero or more arguments, and zero
or one return values.

Today, we're going to discuss writing our own functions for blocks of
code that perform a specific task. For example, let's take an example
from the midterm. On the first question, you were asked to write a
program that converted celcius to fahrenheit. As a function, it could
look like:

    def tempToF(Celcius):
      t = 9 / 5 * Celcius + 32
      return t

This block of code defines a function called tempToF that takes one
argument, which is the temperature in celcius, and it returns the
temperature in fahrenheit.

Noteworthy syntax here is:
The keyword "def" is Python's way of signifying the start of a function
definition.

The name of the function is next. This is the name you will use to run
the function, much like the print function is called "print".

Then, the arguments to the function. This is the variables that the
function needs to operate. In this example, the tempToF function needs
one argument, which is the celcius temperature to convert. Without that
value, the function wouldn't have anything to use in the equation,
Celcius wouldn't have a value.

Next, the body of the function. This is all of the code that will execute
when we run the function. In this example, it's just one line of code
that converts C to F.

Then, the return value. This is generally the last thing in a function.
The keyword return is important, it signifies that whatever appears
after it is the value that the function produces.

Once we've defined a function, we can use it. We do this by calling
the function using the name we gave it in the definition, for example:

    F = tempToF(32)
    print(F)

When you call a function, the code inside of the function definition
executes. In the tempToF example, the function has a return value,
which means that the F will contain the calculations in the function
after the function executes.

When code is structured using functions, you don't change
the functionality, you just change the structure. You will get the
same result from your C to F calculation whether you put the equation
or not. But, as your programs start to include more and more code,
functions become very important for keeping your ideas organized.

Functions can have no arguments and no return value. In this example,
the function will print two lines to the terminal. But, it doesn't need
any additional values to run properly, everything is provided in the
function, and therefore, it doesn't need to have parameters. It also
doesn't produce anything, we know this because there's no return at the
end of the code.

    def printSomeStuff():
      print("print first line")
      print("print second line")

This example is called the same way as the tempToF function, except that
the () are empty, and we don't see any variable equal to the function

    printSomeStuff()

Here's another example. This function is called addTwoNumbers and it
takes two arguments, both numbers, and it returns the sum of those
numbers.

    def addTwoNumbers(num1, num2):
      return num1+num2

The function has a return value, so when you call it, you want the result
of the calculations in the function. To get that result, you set a
variable = to the function:

    s = addTwoNumbers(5,4)
    print(s)

Exercise: we counted vowels in a lecture last week, using the following
code:

    sentence = "The quick brown fox jumped over the lazy dog"
    vowels = 0
    for letter in sentence:
      if letter == "a" or letter == "e" or letter == "i" or letter == "o" or letter == "u":
        vowels = vowels + 1

    print("The sentence has ", vowels, "vowels")

In this example, the sentence was fixed, and the code could calculate
the number of vowels in that sentence only. But, what if you wanted this
to work for any sentence. We could make the sentence an input from the
user and then put the calculation in a loop. But, there's an additional
issue, the code is kinda messy. The thing we really care about is
counting the number of vowels, and our code will be more readable if
we can put the code we've written into a function, and then call that
function. That will perform the task that we're interested in, which is
counting vowels, and it will also make our code more readable.

    def countVowels(sentence):
      vowels = 0
      for letter in sentence:
        if letter == "a" or letter == "e" or letter == "i" or letter == "o" or letter == "u":
          vowels = vowels + 1
      return vowels

A few things changed when we put the code in a function. The sentence is
now an argument that will be set outside the function. This will be
the string that the function uses for counting. The other change is that
we removed the print, and the function will now return a number.

Once we have the function, we can call it. We will pass it the sentence
that we've declared.

    sentence = "The quick brown fox jumped over the lazy dog"
    v = countVowels(sentence)
    #change the print to use v instead of vowels
    print("The sentence has ", vowels, "vowels")

By having a countVowels function, we've hidden the actual calculation,
or put it in a box so that we don't really have to look at it. The name
of our function tells us what it's doing.
In this example, I wrote the function to return a number, and depending
on what you wanted to do with the function once it's written, you could
return a number, or have it print the result of the calculation right
in the function. Here's an example of a problem where you would need it
to return a number.

Exercise: ask the user for two sentences, use the countVowels function
to count the number of vowels in each sentence, and then tell the user
which sentence has more vowels.

Answer in Lecture14CompareVowelCount.py

Functions can also call other functions. It's convention, and in most
languages, required, to have a function called main that is the
starting point for your program. The function main will be where execution
starts, and other functions can be called from within main. For example,
we could put calls to all of the functions we've written so far in main
and execute them from main.

To do this, we define a main, just as we did all of the other functions.
Then, the contents of main includes calls to all of the other functions.


    def main():
      F = tempToF(32)
      print(F)

      '''
      This example uses a variable as the argument to tempToF, and notice
      that the C and the Celcius are different names. It's the position
      that matters. tempToF is expecting one argument, and whatever we
      give it will be used as the value for Celcius in the function.
      '''
      C = 32
      F = tempToF(C)
      print(F)

      printSomeStuff()

      #call the addTwoNumbers function
      n = addTwoNumbers(5,6)
      print(n)
      #the return statement is also important, remove it to see what happens

    #now, we call main, it has no arguments and no return value.
    main()


## Variable scopes

There are a few programming conventions that we are going to focus on,
which will also lead us through a discussion of variable scoping.

Start by declaring our tempToF function:

    def tempToF(C):
      F = 9 / 5 * C + 32
      print(myVarG)
      # Printing Fa will generate an error,
      # remove the # to see the code break
      # print(Fa)
      return F

Next, let's declare our main function. In main, we're going to call
other functions and declare variables.

    def main():
      # call tempToF using an input from the user, and print result
      t = float(input("Enter a temperature to convert:"))
      Fa = tempToF(t)
      print("The temperature in F is:",Fa)

In this example, there are two variables that we have created in
main, the `t` and the `Fa`. These variables can only be seen inside of
main, they are not visible to other functions unless they are
passed to the functions as arguments.

For example, if you add a `print(Fa)` somewhere outside of main, either
in another function, or in no function, we should get an error.

Variables that are declared inside a function are called local
variables, and their "scope" is only within the function. The scope
is where the variable can be seen, which is where it can be used,
modified, etc.

Variables can also have a global scope. Global variables are declared
outside of a function, and can be seen in any function in the file.

    myVarG = "this is a global variable"
    print(myVarG)

We can also add a print(myVarG) to our tempToF function and that will
also work

    main()
    # This will generate an error,
    # remove # to see the code break
    # print(Fa)

## Summary

The scope of a variable is where the variable can be seen. Local variables
are only be seen inside a function where they are declared. Global
variables can be seen everywhere in the file.

<cite>Lecture material by Rhonda Hoenigman.</cite>

