---
layout: post
categories: lectures
title: Sets
---

# Sets

The anagrams sample code we wrote in class is [available with comments](https://gist.github.com/dgraham/24ba864bc667d658e31a).

Sets are used when you want to find the unique items in a collection.
There are several operations on sets that can compare sets and find
properties, are there common items in both sets, are there items in only
one set, is one set the superset of the other, what is the difference
between the sets.

You've probably seen sets in your math classes. Set operations show up
in programming all the time. They are the foundation of database
programming, although database queries look quite a bit different than
the code you'll see here, but the concepts are the same.

Let's start with a list:

    myList = ['a', 'b', 'a', 4]
    print(myList)

One of the properties of sets is that there are no duplicates. You can
make a set out of a list using:

    mySet = set(myList)
    print(mySet)

Notice that there is only one 'a'. The set command removes duplicates,
which can make it really nice to remove duplicates from a list.

We can also look for common items in multiple sets by finding the
intersection of the two sets

Create a second set

    mySet2 = {'a', 'b', 'c'}

There are different ways to see the intersection:
The & operator:

    print(mySet & mySet2)

The intersection method:

    newSet = mySet.intersection(mySet2)
    print(newSet)

There is also a union of two sets. This looks for where an item is in
one set or the other set. I'll use the union method:

    newSet = mySet.union(mySet2)
    print(newSet)

The difference between two sets finds the items that are in one set but
not the other.

    newSet = mySet.difference(mySet2)
    print(newSet)

In the lists example, we read in a file of presidents. There's another
file on Moodle called generals.txt that lists the top 10 war generals
of all time, according to some website.

Question: were there presidents who were also top war generals. Write
function to find them.
Think of algorithm first. Answer is in Lecture19SetPresidentsGenerals.py

<cite>Lecture material by Rhonda Hoenigman.</cite>

