---
layout: post
categories: labs
title: Lab 13—Classes, constructors and structures
---

# Lab 13—Classes, constructors and structures

## Objectives

1. Use classes and constructors.
2. Use structures

Use the checker board program of `Lab 12` and modify it. 

Write a class named CheckerBoard which has the following:

1. Member variable: `board`
2. Methods: `move()` and `displayBoard()`
3. Constructor: Initializes the `board`

Define two structures named `source` and `destination`. They should contain the following:

`source`: `rowSource` and `columnSource`

`destination`: `rowDestination` and `columnDestination`

### Syntax:

     struct source
     {
    	int rowSource;
	int columnSource;
     };
     

Do the same for `destination`. 

Now, modify the `move()` as follows: 

It should take 3 parameters as references. struct named `source` and `destination` and the `success` value. 


Keep the `displayBoard()` same as `Lab 11`. 

(**Note:** No need of passing cout as a reference to it).

Finally, in `main() do the following:

1. Initialize the board as was in `Lab12`
2. Use structs `source` and `destination` to take input from the user for the row and column values for each of source and destination.
3. Call `move()` and pass 3 parameters to it. This should print out the modified board.

###Output1:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/Srinjita/9f7f0190b436a8d14116.js"></script>

###Output2:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/Srinjita/cf2c4adf3c8ff75ee93c.js"></script>


## Zip and submit

To get credit for this lab exercise:

- Submit the file to Moodle as a zip file named *Firstname_Lastname_Lab13.zip*
- Show the TA your code and run your program.

 
     




