---
layout: post
categories: labs
title: Lab 12—References and streams
---

# Lab 12—References and streams

## Objectives

1.	Use `references` as parameters to functions.
2.	Use `output stream(ostream)` as parameter instead of `cout`

Use the checker board program of `Lab 11` and build on to it.

###Part 1:

Modify the `displayBoard()` so that it takes in cout as a reference. Then use the reference variable instead of cout statements. 

###Syntax:

    void displayBoard(ostream &,char board[8][8]);
    
###Part 2:

Write a function named `move` which allows the checker pieces to move around on the board. It takes `six` parameters:

1. rowSource- The row number from which the checker piece has to be moved
2. columnSource- The column number from which the checker piece has to be moved
3. rowDestination- The row number to which the checker piece has to be moved
4. columnDestination- The column number to which the checker piece has to be moved
5. success- An `int` reference variable which indicates whether there was a successful move or not
6. board- The `char` array that contains the checker board

###Syntax:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/Srinjita/e30618db5d8bcd97f760.js"></script>


`move()` should check for the following conditions:

1. Check if the location the piece is moving to is already taken.
2. Check if location entered by the user contains a piece to be moved.
3. Check if the piece is not moving diagonally.

If there is an unsuccessful move that is if any of the above conditions are not satisfied then set value of the reference variable, success to 0. 

Only if there is a successful move that is value of success is 1, then call the `displayBoard()` else print out `“Illegal move!!”`. 

`main():`

`main()` does the following:

1. Accepts rowSource, columnSource, rowDestination and columnDestination as input from user.
2. Initialize the value of success to 1 and then pass a reference of it to `move()`.
3. Call `move()` and pass the parameters to it.

###Output1:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/Srinjita/9f7f0190b436a8d14116.js"></script>

###Output2:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/Srinjita/cf2c4adf3c8ff75ee93c.js"></script>


## Zip and submit

To get credit for this lab exercise:

- Submit the file to Moodle as a zip file named *Firstname_Lastname_Lab12.zip*
- Show the TA your code and run your program.
