---
layout: post
categories: labs
title: Lab 3—Conditionals
---

# Lab 3—Conditionals

## Objectives

- Write a program to take user input and use `if`, `else`, and `elif` conditionals.

## Exercise

For this lab exercise, you are going to write a program to prompt the user for the height of a mountain in feet (ft).
Name your program `Lab3.py`

Then you find out the highest mountain peak with respect to the following data:

| Rank | Height (in ft) | Mountain name |
|:----:|:--------------:|:-------------:|
|   1  |      29029     | Mount Everest |
|   2  |      28251     |       K2      |
|   3  |      28169     | Kangchenjunga |

User should take the height as input and then based on the height you should print out the rank and mountain name as output. The program should check the input with the information provided in the table above and print accordingly.

*Note:* If the input does not match any of the above mentioned heights then print out “Height does not match that of the first three highest mountains. Please enter a correct height”.

### Output

    29029ft is the height of Mount Everest and is the first highest mountain.

Or,

    28251ft is the height of K2 and is the second highest mountain.

Or,

    28169ft is the height of Kangchenjunga and is the third highest mountain.

Or,

    Height does not match that of the first three highest mountains. Please enter a correct height!!

**Hint:** Use `if`, `elif`, and `else` conditionals for checking the height.

## Zip and submit

To get credit for this lab exercise:

- Submit your code to Moodle as a zip file named *Firstname_Lastname_Lab3.zip* and
- Show the TA your code and run your program.
