---
layout: post
categories: labs
title: Lab 8—Classes
---

# Lab 8—Classes

## Objectives

Write a program:

1.	Use class, subclasses, and objects
2.	Use methods and method overriding

## Part 1

Write a program to perform the following:

1. Create a parent class named `Car`.

2. Car class should have a method named `drive()`. It takes in `distance` as a
   parameter and returns the `time`. You should calculate `time` using the equation:

        Time = Distance / Velocity

   *Note:* Take `distance` as a command line argument and pass it to method `drive`.

3. Now, create two subclasses/child classes of `Car` class named `Ferrari`
   and `Kia`. Each subclass has a `velocity` instance variable that's used
   in the `drive()` calculation.

        Velocity of Ferrari: 350mph
        Velocity of Kia: 60mph

4. `Ferrari` and `Kia` should override the `drive()` method of their parent class.
   The `Ferrari`'s `drive` method should add a 30 minute time penalty for stopping
   at a car wash along the way.

5. Find out whether `Ferrari` takes lesser time to reach the distance taken as
   an input or `Kia` takes lesser time; then print it out.

### Input

    Distance = 100 miles

### Output

    Time taken by Ferrari is 0.79 hours.
    Time of taken by Kia is 1.67 hours.
    Ferrari is faster than Kia.

Name your program *Lab8.py*

## Zip and submit

To get credit for this lab exercise:

- Submit your code to Moodle as a zip file named *Firstname_Lastname_Lab8.zip*
- Show the TA your code and run your program.
