---
layout: post
categories: labs
title: Lab 6—Files & functions
---

# Lab 6—Files & functions

## Objectives

Write a program:

1.	Read from a file and write to a file.
2.	Define functions to perform several operations.

Download the [`Statistics.csv`](https://gist.github.com/Srinjita/9e16734bd221f7255348) file which contains the information listed below
separated by commas (,).

    Quarterback, Completions, Attempts, Yards, Touchdowns, Interceptions

Define the following functions:

## readFile

The `readFile()` function reads the comma-separated values file named
`Statistics.csv`. It is a file which has data separated by commas (,). Read
each line, split values in each line based on the comma (,) and store them in a list.
It will also call the `rating()` function and pass the values of completions,
attempts, yards, touchdowns and interceptions to it.

## rating

The `rating()` function is used to calculate the passer rating based on each
of the five arguments that are passed to it from `readFile()`. The function
should perform the following calculations:

    C = (completions per attempt – 0.30) * 5

    Y = (yards per attempt – 3) * 0.25

    T = touchdowns per attempt * 20

    I = 2.375 – (Intercepts per attempt * 25)

    PasserRating = (C+Y+T+I)/6*100

Return the passer rating value that you calculated back to the calling function.

## clean

The `clean()` function is used to get rid of the new lines in the .csv file and
returns a new list with the cleaned up values.

*Hint:* It can be called from `readFile()`, and the list after splitting based
on the commas can be passed to it as a parameter.

## writeFile

The `writeFile()` function should write the total passer rating value into a text
file named `QBOutput.txt`. The contents of the text file should be as follows:

    Total PasserRating value is: 616.84

Your program should also print out the names and the passer rating of each quarterback.

### Output

    T. Romo: 113.24
    D. McNabb: 95.53
    T. Brady: 97.37
    P. Manning: 101.52
    A. Rodgers: 112.19
    D. Brees: 97.00

Name your program *Lab6.py*

## Zip and submit

To get credit for this lab exercise:

- Submit your code and QBOutput.txt file to Moodle as a zip file named *Firstname_Lastname_Lab6.zip*

- Show the TA your code and run your program.




