---
layout: post
categories: labs
title: Lab 5—Strings
---

# Lab 5—Strings

## Objectives

Write a program:

1. Calculate length of a string and reverse a string.
2. Use `replace`, `find`, `split`, and `lower` methods.

## Part 1

Following is an incorrect DNA string:

    DNA = "ACTZATZCTAZZZACCAZ"

DNA strands should only consist of A, C, G and T nucleotide bases. But the above DNA strand has a few Z’s in it as well.

Write a program to take an empty string, name it `DNA1` and traverse through each character of the variable `DNA` and keep appending each character to the new variable `DNA1`. Whenever the character `Z` is encountered skip that character and move on to the next character. This will let you get the original DNA strand. Print the final reversed string after each character has been appended to the new variable.

Name your program *Lab5Part1.py*

### Output

    Original DNA string is: ACTZATZCTAZZZACCAZ and new DNA string is: ACCAATCTATCA

## Part 2

Consider the following string:

    myString = "Hi, my name is FirstName LastName."

Write a program to do the following operations to the above string:

1. Find the starting index of the word “name” and print it as:

        The starting index of name is: 7

2. Replace the word `FirstName` with your First Name and `LastName` with your Last Name. Then print the new formed string.

        Hi, my name is Sherlock Holmes.

3. Split each word in the new formed string, convert each word in the string to lower case and print it.

        hi,
        my
        name
        is
        sherlock
        holmes

Name your program *Lab5Part2.py*

## Zip and submit

To get credit for this lab exercise:

- Submit your code to Moodle as a zip file named *Firstname_Lastname_Lab5.zip*

- Show the TA your code and run your program.
