---
layout: post
categories: labs
title: Lab 10—Header files and standard I/O operations
---

# Lab 10—Header files & standard I/O operations

## Objectives

1.	Learn to create user defined header file
2.	Use different datatypes like `int`, `float`, `double`, `char`
3.	Use `cin` and `cout` commands

## Part 1

Create three files:

1. `speed.h` - Contains function *declarations* for functions `fast_car()` and `slow_car()`.
2. `speed.cc` - Contains function *definitions* for functions `fast_car()` and `slow_car()`.
3. `Lab10.cc` - Contains the `main()` function.

## Functions

There are three functions to write for this program.

### fast_car()

1. Takes `distance` as a parameter.
2. Initialize `speed` = 217mph
3. Calculate `time` as a float value.
4. Return the calculated `time`.

### slow_car()

1. Takes `distance` as a parameter.
2. Initialize `speed` = 60mph
3. Calculate `time` as a float value.
4. Return the calculated `time`.

### main()

1.	Takes `distance` in miles as input from user.
2.	Calls `fast_car()` and `slow_car()` functions and passes `distance` as argument.
3.	Compares time for both `fast_car()` and `slow_car()` and prints out which is faster than the other.


### Input

    Enter distance for the car chase game: 100

### Output

    Time taken by slow car: 1.66667
    Time taken by fast car: 0.460829
    Ferrari, the faster car has won the car chase game!!

### Hint

Write the entire program first in `Lab10.cc` file then extract speed calculation part and separate it out into `speed.h` header file and `speed.cc` file.

### Compiler instructions

Use the following steps to execute your program from command line or terminal.

1. `g++ -c speed.cc`
2. `g++ Lab10.cc speed.o -o carChase`
3. `./carChase`

## Zip and submit

To get credit for this lab exercise:

- Submit all the three files to Moodle as a zip file named *Firstname_Lastname_Lab10.zip*
- Show the TA your code and run your program.
