---
layout: post
categories: lectures
title: Variables, operators, data types
---

# Variables, operators, data types

Programming is about solving problems. Some problems are small, and
can be represented with an algebraic formula, while other problems
are extremely complicated and complex, such as building a computer model
of a city.

But, even with big problems, the individual building blocks
of a solution are generally simple, and it is from those simple blocks
that we can build complex computer code. We start with some big problem
to solve and decompose that problem in to a series of smaller problems,
each of which we can plug into a computer using computer code.

In order for a problem to be reproduced in code, we need a representation
of the problem that captures enough of reality in order to produce a
reasonable solution. For example, say you have 5 apples and 4 oranges, and
you want to write an equation to calculate the number of pieces of fruit
you have. You need a variable for apples, a variable for oranges, and a
variable for fruit. These variables represent an abstraction of the original
problem.

Today, we're starting programming by looking at the basic building blocks
of code: variables. We use variables to represent something in our code
and the type of the variable depends upon what we're representing.

First, let's look at this weeks homework where you printed Hello World
to the terminal.

The print statement is a command built in to Python. When you run the
.py file, the Python interpreter knows to display whatever is contained
between the ().

    print("Hello world")

    #Can print other strings by changing the words in the print statement
    print("Welcome to CSCI1300")
    print("Here is yet another message")

When you create a variable, a location is setup in memory with the variable
name as an identifier for that location and the value at that location.
For example, you can create a variable called "a" with a value of 5 using

    a = 5

The syntax there is left-hand-side = right-hand-side

After that command executes, there is a location in memory that is identified
as a and that location holds a value of 5. In this case, the identifier
is recognized until the program quits. The name of the variable here is
arbitrary, there's nothing special about using the letter a.

You can access "a" and print it's value by doing

    print(a)

We can do this again, creating another variable called b and give it
a value of 6, and then print out the value of b.

    b = 6
    print(b)

Variables have types. The a and b we've created both hold whole numbers,
called integers, so we say that a and b are integers, that's their type.

There are other types we're going to discuss today. The types you will
use most frequently in this class are integers, floats, and strings. There
are also booleans, lists, and dictionaries in Python.

Another variable type is called a string. Strings contain one or more letters
and the value of the variable is the string. For example, we can create
a variable called "aStr" that has a location in memory and holds the value
"this is a string".

    aStr = "this is a string"
    # To check the value of aStr, do
    print(aStr)

There are also numbers with decimal values. These are called floats in
Python, which is short for floating point. An example of a float is

    c = 4.5
    # To check the value of c, use the print statement
    print(c)

The value of a string doesn't necessary need to be a letter. We can also
have strings that are numbers. For example, a string called x with the value
"2.2" and a string called y with the value "4.4".

    x = "2.2"
    y = "4.4"
    print(x)
    print(y)

Another Python variable is called a boolean, which can only have two
values, True or False. These True of False values reduce down to a 1 or
0, on or off. For example, to create a boolean variable called myBool that
is set to True, you do

    myBool = True
    print(myBool)

Notice the color coding of the keyword True. It's blue, indicating that
Pythong recognizes it. If you change the capitalization so that True is
true, the highlighting goes away and you'll get an error when you run
the code. Python is case-sensitive, True is different than true.

    myBool = False

Python also has a variable type called a list, which can store multiple
items together as one variable, and each of those items can actually have
different types

For example, here we have a variable called myList where the first item
is an integer, second item is a float, and third item is a string.

    myList = [4, 6.5, 'a']
    print(myList)

myList has three items in and to access each individual item, we use
the index of the item. Indexing starts at 0, so the first item is
myList[0], the second is myList[1], and the third is myList[2]

    print(myList[0])
    print(myList[1])
    print(myList[2])

Later in the semester, we'll talk about two other data types, one
is a dictionary and the other is a set

There are times when you will want to take a variable that is one type
and make it behave like it's a different type. We call this casting. For
example, if you have a string and you want to be a number, you
would cast it as a float, like so

    x = float(x)
    print(x)

The float command is built in to Python and to use it, anything between
the parentheses is called an argument to the float function. float will
produce a new value that is a type float, using the argument.

Notice here that both the argument to the float function and the return
value of the float function are both called x. It's the same x. You may be
wondering how you can have two things, one on each side of an = sign
that are not actually equal. The left-hand side does not equal the right
hand side.

Recall what `x` is, it's a memory location. What's happening here
is we're saying take the value at the `x` location, convert it to a float,
and return it back to the `x` location. You'll see this over and over again
in programming, where variables in programming and the `=` sign in programming
is not the same as the = sign from math class.

There is also a conversion from float to integer. Here we use the Python
keyword int to convert the existing value of `x` to an integer `x`. Depending
on the value in `x`, we may actually change its value. Since integers don't
have decimal values, if `x` has a decimal, it will be truncated, and you
will be left with the whole number portion only.

    x = int(x)
    print(x)

The type of the variable matters here because of how the variable is handled
when you do operations with it. If you add two numbers together, you get
the sum of those numbers, but if you add two strings together, you get
a new string that is both strings appended together.

For example, let's create float variables and two string variables with
numbers and look at what happens when they are added. This is an operation
on two variables

    a = 5.1
    b = 4.5
    c = a + b
    print(c)

    a = "5.1"
    b = "4.5"
    c = a + b
    print(c)

The + operator can also be used on strings that do not have numbers.
For example, adding two strings creates a new string

    my_str = "hello world "
    my_str2 = "how are you today"
    new_str=my_str + my_str2
    print(new_str)

In the examples with + so far, both variables have been of the same type.
If you try to add two variables with types where the + operator has
different meaning, you will get an error. For example, adding an integer
and a string will result in Python being confused, is the + meant to be
the addition of two numbers, or the appending of two strings

For example, we can create two new variables with different types and add
them, and then watch the error when we print the result.

    n = 5
    s = "the number is "
    # uncomment the next line to see the error
    # sn = s + n
    # print(sn)

The previous print statement produced a type error. Python sees the s first
and then the + and parses the command as appending two strings, and expects
that the variable to the right of the + will be a string. When the n
is reached and it's not a string, an error is generated.

To solve this problem, you can cast one of the variables to match the type
of the other variable. The variable that you choose depends of what
you're trying to achieve and the values of the variables. The options here
are to cast s as a float or integer, or cast n as a string. Since s
isn't a numeric value, we can't cast it as such. However, we can cast
n as a string, and then 5 becomes "5".

    sn = s + str(n)
    print(sn)

There are also standard operations on numbers that you are familiar with.
An example of dividing two numbers:

    a = 5
    b = 6
    c = a / b
    # c is a floating point number, it has a decimal component
    print(c)

    # multiplication
    z = a*b
    print(z)

    # exponentiation, notice the double *
    # x2^2
    z = a**2
    print(z)

    # x2^y2
    z = a**b
    print(z)

    # you can even combine operators in one equation
    z2 = a + (b * z) / a
    print(z2)

### Exercise

Given a circle with a radius of 10 units. Calculate the area and circumference of the circle.

- The formula for area is `pi*r**2`
- The formula for circumference is `2*pi*r`

### Answer

    radius = 10
    # for a variable name, I'm using something meaningful, area and `circ`
    area = 3.14 * radius**2
    circ = 2 * 3.14 * radius
    print("the area is:", area)
    print("the circumference is:", circ)

<cite>Lecture material by Rhonda Hoenigman.</cite>

