---
layout: post
categories: lectures
title: Strings
---

# Strings

Strings are a variable type that is a collection, and can include
letters, numbers, and symbols. We've already worked with strings
when we get input from the user, either using the input command
or a command-line argument.

There are many things we can do to strings in Python to access
one or more items in the collection, or search for particular items
and determine the index of those items.

## Indexing

To demonstrate how we could access one or more items in a string:
we'll start with a word

    my_str = input("type a word: ")
    print(my_str)

    # you can check individual values of a string using an index into the string
    # for example, if you want to get the first element of my_str
    print(my_str[0])

    # notice that the indexing starts at 0
    # this gets the third element of the string
    print(my_str[2])

    # or, get how long is the string with the len command, which takes one argument
    length = len(my_str)
    print(length)

## Slices

A string is a sequence, and as such, there are subsequences within the
sequence. Python calls this a slice. To access a subsequence, you use
the : to indicate a range of indices to access.

For example, to access the third and fourth items,

    new_str = my_str[2:4]
    print(new_str)

The syntax there is the lower index is included and the upper index is
not. `new_str` includes `my_str[2]` and `my_str[3]`, but not `my_str[4]`.

Another option for accessing a subsequence is to specify a starting index,
but not an ending index, such as

    print(my_str[2:])

Doing `my_str[2:]` will start at `my_str[2]` and go to the end of the string.

Or, go the other way and get everything from the beginning, up to a
specified index-1.

    print(my_str[:4])

    print(my_str[:])

## Searching

The ability to search through strings for a given word or phrase is
extremely useful. We've already seen in the for loop lecture how to
examine all words in a sentence looking for vowels. The for loop works
well for small problems where you're searching for one letter, number,
or symbol. But, there are other ways to find items in strings without
iterating through every letter. There is a command called `find` that will
return the index of the item we're searching for.

Let's turn now to DNA examples and search a DNA
string for the presence of a codon. Computational scientists work with
computer representations of DNA searching for patterns. There are
lab experiments with real DNA and those results can then be analyzed
computationally.

Assume we have the following DNA string:

    DNA = "ACCAATCTATCA"

and we're searching for CAA, the codon for Glutamine. We want to find
the index in DNA for the start of CAA.

## String methods

We turn to methods on objects, where the string is the object.
For example, there is a method called
`find` that can be used to find a given item in the string. The
method will produce a value that is the index of where that item was
found. The syntax looks like:

    index = DNA.find("CAA")
    print("CAA found at: ", index)

We've introduced some new notation here, the `.` following the name of the
variable. This is called "dot notation". There's another example using
the count method that enables us
to count the number of times a given item is found. For example, let's
change DNA to include multiple instances of CAA

    DNA = "ACCAACAAT"
    i = DNA.count("CAA")
    print("there are ", i, "instances of CAA")

and if we change DNA to be different, we should see the count produce
a different result.

You can think of the methods as a block of code that has already been
written, much like the `print` command. It's functionality built into Python.
Each type of data has different methods associated with it. Strings have
methods such as `find` and `count`, they also have methods such as `upper`
and `lower` that could be used as follows:

    dna = DNA.lower()
    print(dna)
    DNA = dna.upper()
    print(DNA)

Notice that the `upper` and `lower` have `()`, but nothing is in the `()`. In the
case of `count`, we needed to know what to count. The "CAA" was the argument
to the count method, and told count what it was counting. The argument
is much like your command line arguments are used in
your programs. Those are the values needed for the program to run
correctly. If we didn't have anything in count, the method wouldn't know
what needed to be counted. But with `upper` and `lower`, there's no additional
information needed to make the method work, we just want to make the string
upper case or lower case, so we just have empty () on the methods.

In DNA strings, the ATG codon generally signifies the start of a gene,
and one of the tricks in string searching is to identify those ATG triplets
in a long string.

## Exercise

If you were given AAGTCATGCCCGGGTTCGGA, how would you identify
the ATG and then use that information to generate a new string that
represents the gene and includes the ATG and everything to the end of
the string? Next, count the instances of GGA and GGG in the gene. Answer
is in Lecture10GeneFind.py

Next, let's make a small change to DNA to make it AAGTCATGCCCGGGATCGGA.
Rerun your code, what happened and why? Answer is at the bottom of this
file, but don't look at it until you've worked through the problem.

## Replace

There are many other string processing methods that allow us to do things
such as replace items in a string with other items, such as

    myStr = "Four score and seven years ago"
    myStr = myStr.replace("seven", "many")
    print(myStr)

or introduce genetic mutation

    DNA = "ATGCCATGCTATGGG"
    DNANew = DNA.replace("A","T")
    print("Original: ", DNA, " New: ", DNANew)

## Split

Or, split a string into many pieces using some criteria. We saw this
briefly in the last lecture when we split on blank spaces to count the
words. Here, let's split on " " in the myStr.

    wordList = myStr.split(" ")
    print(wordList)

## Formatting

There are other string processing and formatting commands that are
useful for displaying strings. We've seen one already when we print
floats to the screen:

    f = 4.5678
    print("formatted float: %.2f" %f)

There's another way of formatting strings using the format command. It
looks like:

    print("formatted float {:.2f}".format(f))

The {} can be used to indicate both spacing and decimal precision. For
example, using {:8.2f} will put 8 spaces in front of the printed
variable:

    print("formatted float {:8.2f}".format(f))

This same formatting approach can be used for strings and integers to
put space in the printing:

    print("DNA {:>20s} ".format(DNA))

The `s` indicates that the variable being printed is a string. The 20 is
the size of the printing block, and the > says make it right justified.
This will cause the string to be printed with blank space to the left
of the string that fills in the space to make it 20 characters long.

There are other formatting that you can do on strings, such as adding
tabs to space things evenly, or forcing a new line in the printing.

    myStr = "This is a test string"
    print(myStr)

    myStr = "This \t is \t a \t test \t string"
    print(myStr)

    myStr = "This is a \n\n\ntest string"
    print(myStr)

Returning to the question about searching for GGA and GGG in
AAGTCATGCCCGGGATCGGA, you have a case
of overlap, where the GGGA counts GGG and GGA, eventhough there clearly
should be only one codon there, but the question is, which one is it?

This is one of the HUGE computational
challenges in a bioinformatics field is determining what these values are
and separating the codons from the extra stuff in the gene. Depending
on where the gene starts, different answers can be produced.

There are approximately 3 billion base pairs in human genome and
20,000 genes. Finding the starting and stopping points of all genes,
and identifying the active areas of the genes is like a jigsaw puzzle
with 3 billion pieces and no picture.

To accomplish this task, computational biologists turn to leverage
what they do know to make predictions about the unknown.

There are many times in computing where you may want to know how
similar one thing is to another. This is true in bioinformatics where
there is a desire to know how similar two genes are to each other.
Detecting similarity between sections of DNA sequences is one way that
genes can be identified, and functionality can be identified. For example,
if two DNA sequences from different organisms are compared and
regions of the DNA appear similar, then scientists can hypothesize that
those regions possess similar functionality and can then go about testing
that hypothesis. One of the simplest similarity measures is called
the hamming distance, and it basically involves summing up the number
of places where two DNA sequences differ.

For example, given two DNA sequences,

    DNA1 = "ATGCCATGCGGG"
    DNA2 = "AAGCCATACGGA"

We can calculate the hamming distance by looping through each item in
the string and checking whether it's the same as the item in the other
string. If not, add 1 to the distance.

We will compare DNA1[0] to DNA2[0], DNA1[1] to DNA2[1], etc for all letters

There are several ways to do this, I'll start with a way that uses range

The algorithm:

- initialize a distance variable to 0
- get the length of the string to know how many comparisons to make
- loop through each letter in string
- if DNA1[x] does not equal DNA2[x], then add 1 to distance

    hd = 0
    l = len(DNA1)
    for x in range(0,l):
      if DNA1[x] != DNA2[x]:
        hd = hd + 1
    print(hd)

Finding the best match between two sequences is where complex
processing such as sequence alignment is needed.

    # declare variable
    DNA = "AAGTCATGCCCGGGTTCGGA"

    # use find to identify starting codon in the DNA
    i = DNA.find("ATG")

    # i is an index, a new string can be created by starting at that index
    #and grabbing everything to the end
    gene = DNA[i:]

    # use count on the gene string to count the instances of the GGA and GGG
    GGA = gene.count("GGA")
    GGG = gene.count("GGG")

    print(gene)
    print("Number is ", GGA + GGG)

<cite>Lecture material by Rhonda Hoenigman.</cite>

