---
layout: post
categories: lectures
title: File IO
---

# File IO

Programs often need data as part of the functionality of the program.
For example, in our lecture on strings, we typed a long string in
Geany to declare a string variable. For example, DNA = "ATGATCGGGCAGT".
When doing that, it's very easy to make a mistake, and it's also tedious
to have to type that, especially if you're working with multiple DNA
sequences, or multiple instances of any kind of data for that matter.
Another approach is to store the DNA sequence in a file and then read the
data into your program by accessing that file in your program, opening
it, reading in the data and storing it in variables, and then closing
the file. This is really useful when you have lots of data that
you're working with, or when you need to do something more than once.
You can do that using what's called File I/O, these are commands in
Python that allow you to read in data from files and also write data
out to files for storage.

Lets say we have a file called DNA.txt that has a DNA sequence in it.
For this exercise, I've created a file called DNA.txt, it's on Moodle
I'm going to open it and print its contents.

First, open the file:

    myFile = open("DNA.txt", "r")

The open command is built-in to Python, and it's looking for two arguments.
First, the name of the file to open, here, that's DNA.txt. The file is
in the same directory as the .py file. The second
argument is what can be done to the file once it's open. There are several
options for actions on the file. The "r" means only allow reading of the
file, nothing can be written back out to the file in this way. This is
a safe way to open a file because it means that you can't
do anything in your code that will overwrite the file in any
way. You don't have write permissions on the file when it's opened with
the "r".

The variable myFile is a data type that we haven't used yet, it's
called a file object, and it contains a pointer to the data stored in the
file.
Objects are more complex than the variables we've used, such as floats
and integers
objects have properties, such as a name, and they have methods, which
are things that they do
in the line above: myFile.close(), the close() is a method, an action
that we do to myFile
If you print myFile, you'll see information about the object, showing the
name and type of permissions, and the encoding.

    print(myFile)

The myFile variable is a file object that points to the file at the
external location and you can use the file object to access the
contents of the file.

We're going back to loops briefly because we need a loop to read the
contents of the file. Remember that a for loop can be used to loop
through items in a collection. So far, we've seen collections that were
strings and lists. A collection can also be the lines in a file, and we
can access each individual line in the collection using a for loop.

The syntax for looping through a file is the same as the syntax for
looping through a list or a string. For example,

    for p in myFile:
        print(p)

In this example, we create a variable called "p" and the for loop will
assign each line in the file to "p", one at a time, in order.

Then, it's always good to close the file right after you use it.

    myFile.close()

When you run the code, you should see the one line in the file print
to the terminal.

You can open DNA.txt and add more lines and run the
code and you will see each line print to the terminal in order.

There's always many ways to solve any problem in programming, and file
I/O is no exception. The for loop is one way to read the contents of a
file. Another way is to use the readlines function built in to Python.
readlines is a method of the file object. For example,

    myFile = open("DNA.txt","r")
    fo = myFile.readlines()
    print(fo)
    myFile.close()

readlines generates a list, where each item in the list is one of the
lines in the file. You can access individual lines using the index of
the line in the file. For example, to access the first line

    print(fo[0])

and the second line

    print(fo[1])

Or, using the for loop, you can access every line in the file, in order

    for x in fo:
        print(x)

The readlines method will get all of the data in the file. But, you may
want to only read one line, or read one line at a time. There's another
method, called readline, that has a similar purpose to readlines, but
only reads one line. Here's the syntax:

    myFile = open("DNA.txt", "r")

This reads one line and prints it

    x = myFile.readline()
    print(x)
    myFile.close()

Part of the built-in functionality of readline() is that it increments
to the next line, so that if readline() is called again, it is the next
line in the file that is read. You don't have to do anything to move
readline() to the next line.

Here's an example of how readline would be useful. There's another file
on Moodle called QBDataTop2012.csv. This file contains the stats for the
the top quarterbacks in 2012. The first line in the file contains the
labels for each column. If you were given a question, such as, how many
touchdowns were thrown by the top 10 quarterbacks, you would need all
of the quarterback-specific data, but you wouldn't need the first line
in the file explaining what was stored in each column. If you use
readlines(), it will give you the entire file, including the header.
However, if you read the first line using readline(), and then read the
other lines using readlines(), then you have one variable with the
header information, which you don't really need, and you have another
variable that contains the information you care about.

First, think about the algorithm.
The data is stored in a file, so the file needs to be opened and read
the data.
One of the columns in the file is the touchdowns. You need to know
which column is the touchdowns.
Loop through each line and access the touchdown column
  Sum the touchdowns
Print the result

    # open the file, for reading only
    qb = open("QBDataTop2012.csv","r")
    # we don't need the header row, so we'll jump past it using readline
    # and print it
    print(qb.readline())
    # we should be pointing to the first line of actual data now, so get all of it
    data = qb.readlines()
    print(data)

initialize a td counter
loop through each item in the list and pull out the data in column
index 6. You need to split the line to separate the individual pieces
so that they can be accessed. The values are all strings, so you will
need to convert it to an integer.

    td = 0
    for l in data:
        row = l.split(",")
        print(row[6])
        td = td + int(row[6])
    print(td)

we can also reverse the process and write data to a file
the "w" means open the file for writing, file is created if it doesn't exist

    myFileOut = open("QBOutput.txt", "w")
    myFileOut.write("Total touchdowns " + str(td) + "\n")

    myFileOut.close()

Your recitation this week covers these concepts examining weather data
for Boulder. The recitation deadline is Friday. If you have Tuesday
recitation and didn't finish the exercise, you still have time to work
through the problems and submit your answers by Friday.

Some additional exercises:
Redo assignment 3 with the passer rating to read in the data from
QBDataTop2012.csv and calculate the passer rating for all 10
quarterbacks. The solution is in a file called QBData.py. The
solution uses the full qb rating algorithm, which includes some additional
code that we didn't use in assignment 3.

There is another file on Moodle called Lecture13HurricaneData.csv. Use
this file to calculate the average hurricanes per year.

<cite>Lecture material by Rhonda Hoenigman.</cite>

