---
layout: post
categories: lectures
title: Lists
---

# Lists

And now, lists. We've used lists quite a bit already, and shown how
you can create a list and index a list.

    def listExamples():
      myList = [2,3,4,'a']
      print(myList[1])

Today, we're going to discuss some of the methods available for manipulating lists.

First, what is a method. I used the word method when we discussed string.
For example, there was a count method that would allow you to easily
count the instances of a given substring within a string.

    myStr = "ABCADACGADE"
    numA = myStr.count("A")
    print(numA)

The count method is a chunk of code that has been written and given a
label, called count, that can perform operations. In this case, the
task is to count the instances of the substring. A method is just like a
function. A function is a block of code that performs operations. The
difference between the two is in what the code can operate on. A method
is specifically tied to an object, such as a string, or a list, while a
function is general.

Lists are objects, just like strings are objects, and in python, there
are methods designed to work on lists. If you have a list, there are
things you are going to want to do to the list pretty regularly. Some
tasks are adding items to a list, deleting items, replacing items,
sorting items. So far, every list we've created has been initialized
with all items at the time we created it, we haven't tried to build a list
from lots of data. For example, when we read a file, we've created a
string from each line and then a list from that string, but we haven't
tried to build a list from all entries in the file.

For example, there's a file on Moodle called presidents.txt that includes
all US presidents. Some presidents are listed more than once if they
were president more than once. We want to build a list of presidents.

Algorithmically, this looks like:
Open the file
Initialize an empty list
Append each president in the file to the list

    fo = open("presidents.txt","r")
    presidents = fo.readlines()
    pList = list()
    for p in presidents:
      pList.append(p)
    print(pList)

In this example, each president read from the file is added to the list
using the append method on the list.

Working with the list of presidents, we may want to answer the question:
How many terms did George Washington serve? This is the same as saying:
How many times does George Washington appear in the list? The list
has a count method that works just like the count method on a string,
it will count the number of times the argument appears in the list.

First, we need to do some string processing. Each of the presidents has
a \n after his name. This is the newline character in the file, we need
to remove it. We can do so using the rstrip() method on the name before
adding it to the list.

Change the pList.append(p) to pList.append(p.rstrip("\n")). You will
need to change that line before any of the following commands will
work correctly.

The rstrip will remove whatever character you give it as an argument
from the right side of the string.

A lot of what we do in programming is dealing with these types of issues,
getting data into the format we need it to be in order to use it
in the way we want to use it.

    gwTimes = pList.count("George Washington")
    print("George Washington was president ",gwTimes,"times")

There is also built-in functionality to sort a list.

    pList.sort()

There are a few things to notice here. We don't have to return a sorted
list, the list is sorted in place, and if we print pList again, it will
be sorted. All of the messiness of the sorting is hidden in the command
and as the user, we don't have to worry about it.

The other thing to notice is that there isn't an argument to the sort
method. sort doesn't need any additional information to operate, it just
needs to know what to sort.

    print(pList)
    pList.reverse()
    print(pList)

Remove an item from the list. For remove, there is an argument,
it's the item to remove. This does not remove all instances of an
item, only the first one found. If you count again, it should now
be 1 instead of 2.

    pList.remove("George Washington")
    print(pList)
    gwTimes = pList.count("George Washington")
    print(gwTimes)

    listExamples()

<cite>Lecture material by Rhonda Hoenigman.</cite>

