---
layout: post
categories: labs
title: Lab 7—Sets & Dictionaries
---

# Lab 7—Sets & Dictionaries

## Objectives

Write a program:

1.	Define functions to use sets
2.	Define functions to use dictionaries

## Part 1—Sets

Define a function to take in a DNA string as a parameter. The DNA string
consists of a combination of several chemical bases namely A, C, T, G. Write a
program to find the unique chemical bases present in the string. Also print out
the number of unique chemical bases present.

*Hint:* Use a `set()` to find the unique chemical bases.

### Input

    DNAString = "CGCAAATTTGCCGGATTTCCTTTGCTGTTCCTGCATGTAGTTTAAACGAGATTGCCAGCACCGGGTATCATTCACCATTTTTCTTTTCGTTAACTTGCCGTCAGCCTTTTCTTTGACCTCTTCTTTCTGTTCATGTGTATTTGCTGTCTCTTAGCCCAGACTTCCCGTGTCCTTTCCACCGGGCCTTTGAGAGGTCACAGGGTCTTGATGCTGTGGTCTTCATCTGCAGGTGTCTGACTTCCAGCAACTGCTGGCCTGTGCCAGGGTGCAGCTGAGCACTGGAGTGGAGTTTTCCTGTGGAGAGGAGCCATGCCTAGAGTGGGATGGGCCATTGTTCATG"

### Output

    The DNA string has 4 unique elements.
    The elements are: {'A', 'G', 'C', 'T'}

Name your program *Lab7Part1.py*

## Part 2—Dictionaries

Define two functions named `main()` and `name_lengths()`. The `main()` function should:

1. Call `name_lengths()`
2. Pass a list of names to it as a parameter
3. Capture the result in a variable.
3. Print out the names and their lengths in the format below.

The `name_lengths()` function should:

1. Loop through each name in the list and find its length.
2. Create a dictionary that will store the names as keys and the length of the names as values.
3. Return the dictionary to the caller.

*Hint:* You can use `rjust()` and `ljust()` for formatting the output.

### Input

    names = [
        "Romo",
        "McNabb",
        "Brady",
        "Manning",
        "Rodgers",
        "Brees",
        "Kaepernick",
        "Flacco"
    ]

### Output

    ******************************
    Name                   Length
    ******************************
    Kaepernick                10
    Romo                       4
    Brees                      5
    Flacco                     6
    McNabb                     6
    Manning                    7
    Brady                      5
    Rodgers                    7

Your output may list the names in a different order. It's important to
understand why.

Name your program *Lab7Part2.py*

## Zip and submit

To get credit for this lab exercise:

- Submit your code to Moodle as a zip file named *Firstname_Lastname_Lab7.zip*
- Show the TA your code and run your program.

